\documentclass{article}
 
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{caption}
\usepackage{subfigure}
\usepackage{epstopdf}
\usepackage[ansinew]{inputenc}
\usepackage{listings}
\usepackage{xcolor}
%\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{0cm}
%\setlength{\evensidemargin}{0cm}
%\setlength{\topmargin}{0cm}

\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage[normalem]{ulem}

\usepackage{a4wide}

\title{Simulating the I/O behavior of the NEST simulator using a proxy}

\author{Till Schumann, Alexander Peyser, Wolfram Schenck, Wolfgang Frings, Kay Thust, Jochen Martin Eppler}
\date{INM-6}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

Over the past 20 years, the NEST Initiative
(\url{http://www.nest-initiative.org/}) has developed a simulator for
spiking neural network models called NEST \cite{NEST}. It is used in
computational neuroscience to simulate the dynamics of the interaction
between nerve cells. The systems explored with NEST range from small
networks simulated on local machines up to large brain-scale circuits
using the full capabilites of the world's leading supercomputers. To
have this flexibility, NEST is parallelized in a hybrid fashion using
threads locally on a compute node and MPI to communicate between the
compute nodes \cite{Plesser07}.  Storing simulation data from such a
massively parallel application efficiently during runtime is essential
for neuroscientic studies, but not a trivial task on a supercomputer
with centralized storage.

To obtain measurements from a simulation in NEST, virtual devices can
be connected to simulated nerve cells. These devices write the content
of member variables or the spiking activity of the nerve cells to
disk. Currently, each measurement device opens its own file using
plain C++ streams.  With increasing number of devices and compute
nodes, writing data to disk in this way becomes the bottleneck of the
whole simulation. Due to a constant growth in simulation sizes and
threrefor compute nodes, a new writing strategy becomes necessary.

One solution to the problem is the use of efficient parallel I/O
libraries. It is, however, not clear, which of the available libraries
is the best. In order to assess the characteristics of different such
libraries, we implemented a \emph{proxy}, which imitates the writing
behavior of NEST based on a small set of parameters such as the number
of nerve cells to record from, the number of threads and processes, or
the rate at which data is recorded.

This technique allows us to run benchmarks and carry out statistical
analysis of the disk writing timings and optimizations of the
interfaces without the computational overhead and complexity of
running a full NEST simulation. Currently, the proxy has experimental
interfaces for plain text, HDF5 \cite{hdf2010hierarchical} and SIONlib
\cite{frings2009scalable} and is parametrized with data from profiling
runs of real NEST simulations. The results of the benchmarks will
guide our choice towards a new i/O sub-system for NEST.

\bibliographystyle{plain}

\bibliography{./report}

\end{document}